Statement Of Purpose

To be at the forefront of innovation and make a difference in the world of technology, one must have not only talent but also a dynamic and evolving knowledge base. With this notion in mind, I have strived to develop competency in the subject of Data Science through my undergraduate course and internship experiences. Through my extensive coursework, I have been further captivated by the complexities of this discipline over the last four years. Now, in the continuum and spirit of learning, I believe that a Masters in Data Science and Analytics (MPDA), M.P.S is the best decision to cultivate this passion and transform it into tangible achievements.

My undergraduate years in Computer Science Engineering played a pivotal role in sowing the seeds of curiosity when it comes to my niche in Data Science. Theoretical courses, like Machine Learning, Deep Learning, and Data Warehouse & Data Mining, provided me with the opportunity to gain invaluable knowledge about Data Analysis and how its applications are integrated into our lives. Furthermore, laboratory courses in Data Structures and Applications, Machine Learning, Database Management Systems, and Finite Automata & Formal Languages helped me develop a better understanding and respect for how algorithms function, why they are utilized, and how they are utilized to analyze and manipulate stored data to produce a desirable outcome.

Apart from being consistent in my academics, I have also sought hands-on exposure to ensure my learnings do not limit themselves to theoretical understanding. Alongside my undergraduate courses, I worked on several mini-projects and internships within the field of data science.

As a movie buff, I was constantly looking for ways to create a community around the independent filmmaking sector. My project 'Cinescope' was created with this same goal in mind. It was a website that connected filmmakers solely based on their skill and value, regardless of their similarity. Similarly, the 'Movie Box Office Success Prediction' was a project that focuses on using datasets to forecast the success of a film. However, the dataset provided had various inconsistencies, which required a significant amount of time to analyze and balance. We ran a univariate and bivariate analysis on each feature in feature engineering to determine the impact of the value on revenue and to understand the data dispersion. Using a confusion matrix, we narrowed down the characteristics required to produce an outcome. We ran the dataset through several machine learning models after modifying it to meet our specifications to find the most accurate model for the specific data set. Needless to say, the venture was one of the fascinating aspects of my undergraduate experience, and it strengthened my commitment to pursue the field further.

Furthermore, I worked on many papers that allowed me to comprehend the domain's trends, complexities, and advances. One particular project was the 'College Exam Allocation System Using Mongo dB and Python3', designed for expository purposes. I created a system that universities can use to generate exam schedules automatically. I designed a new system for our college's examination department so that teachers don't waste time preparing and creating exam timetables and seating arrangements for days. Though creating a personalized schedule was difficult, it aided me in learning about database control and maintenance through the use of a programming language.

Another paper was 'Navigation Systems Using A*,' which uses a path-finding algorithm to discover the ideal route for an ambulance. Additionally, I was able to learn how to design graph traversal methods. The effort in these papers was rewarded when they were published in 2021 at the 6th International Conference on 'Recent Trends in Electronics, Information & Communication Technology (RTEICT)' and ‘2021 IEEE Global Conference for Advancement in Technology (GCAT).'

Encouraged by the success of these projects, I also worked on 'Social Interaction and Service Robot for Hospital Wards,' which arose from the drive to create a robot to assist the large number of patients who arrived during the pandemic. This experience taught me how to work with IoT, albeit at a very basic level, because I was involved in the path detection aspect of it. I learned the fundamentals of sensor interfacing, IoT with the Raspberry Pi, and cloud computing. It was also responsible for strengthening my resolve to continue my education so that I could conduct more indepth research on the integration of Data Science and Analytics and the healthcare industry.

After working through the challenges these projects demanded, I sought experience from the industry sector. Thus, I started working as a Data and Business Analytics intern at the Sparks Foundation. Tasks such as importing a dataset, cleaning the dataset, visualizing and understanding patterns, and predicting an output based on the problem statement were assigned to me here while working on the assignments. This internship provided me with the opportunity to truly enter the professional world, apply my theoretical knowledge of a subject to practical use, and most importantly, gain confidence in the career path I had selected.

My next internship was at Digitran Solutions. I worked on an Optical Character Recognition-based resume extractor for a professional who requires a tool to help him summarize and extract the essential facts from resumes for his jobs. My 'Compiler Design and System Software' lecturer, who was also a company employee, was a major motivator for this internship. Having established a rapport with the professor, I wanted to seek additional professional guidance from him when his company had an opportunity. The company's mission was to create solutions to overwhelming challenges, which aligned with my work and student experience thus far.

Amidst this repertoire of internships, one of the most prominent experiences would be my involvement in the Computer Society of India Group. My teammates and I held a few workshops for our college juniors and others to help them learn python and a more advanced workshop to help people understand Data Visualization using python. We not only gained new skills but also had the opportunity to impart our skills to contribute to shaping the upcoming generations.

Aside from the Data Science Curriculum, a considerable portion of my time was spent giving back to my university's community by a TEDx event at my institution, where I was in charge of everything from curation to stage design to bringing in sponsors. From 2019 to 2020, I was also the volunteer organizer, guiding the speakers through the event's subject, traveling the city to find sponsors, speaking with contractors for stage design work, and managing the tech side of things on the day of the event. All of these responsibilities, while demanding, provided me with a great deal of satisfaction and delight, as well as considerably contributed to my personal development. With regards to my societal contributions, I am pleased to be part of a community outreach program held by one organization where they help out the people living in an old age home. We make monthly or bi-monthly visits to check up on them and ensure them of care. We also host fun programs and events to help them break out from their monotony and provide them with some entertainment while striving to arrange the best of food, clothes, and shelter to deliver a pleasant experience.

Having recounted my experiences, I believe it is evident that my interest in Data Science is not merely coincidental. After numerous and deliberate encounters with the field, I have realized that my future consists of excelling in this discipline both academically and professionally. With a Master's degree in Data Science and Analytics (MPDA), M.P.S from your prestigious university, I hope to grow as a Data Scientist in the Computer Science industry soon. In the long term, I will be looking to integrate my Data Science passion with another one of my interests, such as filmmaking and writing. Apart from that, I intend to use analytics and data science to develop a strategy for understanding food supply chain management to eliminate waste while successfully managing supply and demand balance. I would make every effort to contribute to the healthcare industry, where we would like to examine the influence different foods have on the body and find out how to optimize food intake and delivery so that diseases are kept to a minimum.

One of the more substantial reasons for taking up Data Science, apart from my interest in the subject, is to understand the pain points in society with the help of data. Data represent the most factual, unbiased, and unadulterated view of things. Aggregating such data, I would like to understand the truth behind anything I want to put my weight behind. In our country, the quality of our education is not at par with international standards. With the help of Data and Data Science, I would like to identify the most pressing pain points and try resolving them to ameliorate the status quo of our education sector. This is just one example of how I can implement Data Science to help better the educationally underserved segment of one society. Each society represents a unique problem, and I think Data can serve as a universal path to the solution.

Towards these goals, a robust level of proficiency in Data Science is highly desirable. Therefore, I'd like to enroll in a rigorous graduate program known for its expertise in these fields. The University of Maryland – being a well-reputed institution of prominence, provides a perfect balance of academic and research culture that would be an excellent training ground for any technology enthusiast such as myself. A list of courses like Communication in Data Science and Analytic Capstone Research Project address several aspects of disciplines in which I am interested in developing competence. On the research front, I am impressed with Dr. Amol Deshpande's intriguing work on "energy-efficient data management." I wish to delve deeper into this domain and gain a stronghold over my subjects of interest by collaborating and working simultaneously with such eminent researchers. I aspire to showcase my religious and mythological knowledge by joining the Bhagavad Gita Club. Widening my passion for understanding the role of Machine learning and AI in the future will be aided greatly by the BIg THink AI group as well. To conclude, I believe that throughout my undergraduate education and professional career, I have exhibited a strong propensity for research and have kept my flair alive to surmount great feats with sheer commitment and great technical skills. I have braced myself to shoulder newer responsibilities, and your university will immensely facilitate me to attain my goals.

Nithin Sameer Yerramilli